Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger, and today
we're going to look at the algorithm of
finding the square root of a number. This
is an important operation that goes back
to antiquity—to the ancient Greeks, to
the Chinese, to the Arabs, Babylonians,
and even to the Hindus. It's important because
it's the basis for solving quadratic equations.
Without being able to take a square root, the
quadratic formula doesn't make too much sense.
Let's start off with an example and show you
three different approaches to the subject.
The one that we're mainly interested in is
one developed by the Hindu mathematicians,
and it's a very practical algorithm that you
can try yourself after you've learned it.
Alright, so here's an example: 523 squared
equals this number, 2703529. We say that 523 is
the square root of this number. The idea is we are
given this number to start with, and we're trying
to find the square root. One way of approaching
it, which is a good way for public school students
to start thinking about the subject, is to make
some guesses. 500 squared is 250,000, while 600
squared is 360,000, so the real answer must lie
somewhere in between those two guesses. Then we
can make some further guesses, keep on squaring
the guesses that we have, and see if we're getting
bigger or less than our starting number, and
eventually we'll zero in on our number 523.
Here's another method that goes back to the
ancient Babylonians. Basically, the idea is this:
suppose that x squared equals n is the equation
we're trying to solve. So what we do is we make
an initial guess x1, we compute n divided by x1,
then we set x2 to be the average of these two
numbers—the average of x1 and n divided by x1—and
then we repeat the process using x2 instead of
x1. The idea is that if x1 is exactly the square
root, then n divided by x1 will be equal to x1,
and these two numbers will be equal. Otherwise,
one of them will be less than and one of them will
be bigger than the square root, and so averaging
those two numbers, it's a relatively good guess
for the square root. If we keep doing that, then
we approach the square root value. This method
is essentially the same as Newton's method,
discovered by Isaac Newton, which is taught
in calculus courses. Without going into too much
detail, the idea is roughly that we have a curve
and we want to find its zero. Say the curve is
represented by the equation x squared minus n,
then what we do is we take one guess here and find
the tangent, see where that tangent intersects the
x-axis, and then that's our next guess. Then
the next tangent gives us the next guess, and
so on. It turns out that this Babylonian method,
four thousand years ago, is essentially Newton's
method in this particular case. However, for
pen-and-paper calculations, or even by computer,
it's a little bit slow in the sense that you
have to rely on dividing and repeated divisions.
So let's have a look at the third method,
which is due to the Hindus. This Vedic
method relies on the following identity:
(x + y) squared is x squared plus we can
write the rest in this form: 2x + y times
y. The basic idea is that we're going to have an
initial approximation, and then we're going to
guess how much we have to adjust that initial
approximation by computing a term like this.
So in our example of 523 squared, let's make the
following observations: 500 squared is 250,000,
okay, so that's less than our number n. 520
squared will be, according to this law here,
it's 500 squared plus 2 times 500 plus 20, so
1,000 plus 20 times 20. It's a way of thinking
of how you go from here to here. What you're
doing is you're adding this new component,
and that turns out to be this number here.
Then the next stage, 523 all squared,
well that's what we have at the previous
stage, that's 520 squared right there,
plus something extra. The extra term
given by 2 times 500 and 20 plus 3
times 3. This is a clue to how to set up
the Vedic algorithm. Here's how it works:
We write down the number that we're trying to
find the square root of, and we divide it into
groups of two. We look at the leftmost group
of two and we find its square root, which is
a number between 0 and 9. In this case, 27 is
close; the square root is 5. 5 squared is 25,
and if we subtract 25 from here, the 2
comes down and then we also bring down
the next pair of numbers. Now we have 235. This
corresponds to our initial guess of 500 squared.
In the next step, what we have to do is we
are going to multiply what we have up here,
the 5, by 2. 5 times 2 is 10, and we're going
to leave a little space for an extra digit.
That's like that y, and we're going to try
to find an extra digit here, in this case 2,
which has the property that this digit times 10
with a digit is pretty close to our remainder,
235. So we're looking for a digit number
between 0 and 9 so that when you add it to 10,
1 times digit and multiply it by the digit y, then
you are getting something that's close but less
than 235. If we tried 1, for example, we would
have 101 times 1, well that would be less than
235. But 2 also works, 102 times 2 is 204, which
is less than 235. 3, however, would be too big
because 103 times 3 would be bigger than 235.
So 2 is the right number, and we subtract 204
and we get 31. Then we pull the 29 down, and then
we're going to repeat the same process with 329.
What we do is we take 52, which we've
already got, multiply it by 2, there's 104,
and we add room for an extra digit. Now
we have to choose that digit so that when
we multiply the digit 2 times this number,
we get something that's less than or equal
to our remainder. It turns out that 3
exactly works, and when we subtract,
we get a remainder of 0, telling us that 523
is the square root of our original number.
So let's look at another example. Alright, so
here's the number that we're trying to find the
square root of. We write that number down and
we group its digits into groups of 2. Looking
at the leftmost group, its square root or
closest to it will be 7. 7 squared is 49,
we subtract and we get 22. Then we pull down the
next pair of digits for a remainder of 263. Now
we're going to take the seven, multiply it by
2 for 14, and try to find the new digit, so y,
so that y times 14y is close to 263 but less than
it. Well, 1 is the best one because if we use 2,
we get 142 times 2; that would be
bigger than this. So we put a 1 there,
1 times 141, we subtract, we get
122, and then we pull down the 85.
At this stage, we have 71 already. Multiply 71
by 2 right there, now we have to guess what the
new digit is so that this times this is less
than our remainder. Well, you have to adjust,
but there are only possibilities from 1
to 9, so it's not that bad. You guess 8,
and 8 works. 8 times this is this number here.
Take the subtraction and you get 861. Finally,
we pull down the last pair of numbers, 96.
Take 718, multiply it by 2, right there,
and leave a space. Find a digit, 6 in this case,
so that's 6 times this number with a 6 there,
is less than or equal to our number or
remainder. Now it works out exactly,
so we get 0, meaning we've got an
exact square root. The answer is 7186.
Next time, we're going to have a look at how
algebra helps us understand patterns generated
by special numbers. I hope you'll join me for
that. I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.